Mrs. Dona Coulter Carnes on March 24, 1975. Ms.
Dona is 96 years old and lives on the same property
that her parents did, 502 East 26th in Bryan.
The town, when the people were beginning to find
out that there was a new town opened up, they
commenced to come to make themselves citizens.
And my father came as a young boy, a horseback from
Nashville, Arkansas, to be one of the younger men
of our town. And my mother came all the way from
Nashville, Tennessee with her father and mother
to Texas to find another home that they thought was
nicer than where they came from. And my father fell
in love with my mother and they were married. My
mother was raised by Dr. H.T. Downard, and he was
the first mayor of Bryan, Texas.
And he was one of the most active citizens that we
had because when he came, there was no school. And
he sent all the way with his own money to
Louisville, Kentucky, from where his wife's
people came from, and started a little neighbor
school over what we call now Washington Avenue,
and which is now used as a gas station. But he paid
for the schoolteacher and kept her in his home all
that time.
was like most all the other little new towns, the
merchants all bought their business houses
around the courthouse. You'll see that in
traveling all over Texas and the new states, that
that's the way they did. It's over that way in
Caldwell. But
whoever started that was doing it for the almighty
dollar and to get rich quick. So the people who
wanted to buy buildings and put up buildings
didn't like that. So that's the reason we have Main
Street downtown Brian. Now, you never have seen
any of the stores until recently where one of them
has been around the courthouse. And my father came
here because his sister had married Colonel P.R.
Smith, who was one of the early merchants here in
town, and built a store down on Main Street. And
then my father clicked for him, and P.R. Smith was
beginning to have a little trouble financially,
and that was hurting my father also because he had
borrowed some of my father's money left from the
estate, the Coulter estate in Arkansas. So my
mother says, now, don't you be discouraged if you
don't get what $100, $50 is going in the bank. And we
are going to amount to something in this little
town. And whatever his salary was, she took half of
that money and put it in the bank. And we, my father,
after the first child was born, bought this piece
of property here, the whole entire block of
ground. And he kept it that way because everybody
had to look after a way to travel. And my father had a
horse. and a buggy, and we had the finest milk cow
that anybody could possibly buy. And we had plenty
of chickens and guineas and ducks and gardens and
everything that it takes to make a happy home. And
we had a happy home. I guess one of the most
enjoyable, prosperous families that you could
find anywhere. And so my father soon had enough
money saved up that he bought the dry goods store
from his brother-in-law and a friend of his. They
were in together. Mr. Bowers was the name. Bowers
and P.R. Smith. And my father bought. their
interest and so his business kept growing and
growing and growing and my mother kept saving and
saving and saving and finally they got enough
money that they bought the building that the
business was in which was a brick building. All of
Main Street was in deep sand, very deep sand. And it
was made extremely wide, much wider than any
country town that you could see has. And that was
due to the ox teams that people would come. They'd
drive oxen to their farm wagons and come in, and
they'd be parked right out on Main Street We have a
picture that shows that where all of the people are
gathered. And then finally, as time went by, a club
was organized. And from this club, they put just
one standard of lights down Main Street for every
block that they had. They had two lights, one on in
the section of East Street. And so it wasn't long
until they began to, each merchant began to
improve their buildings, and in all of the stores,
they were all exactly alike, they had three
openings, three doors, and to each entrance was
two doors. I made six doors for this whole entire
store. There was no show windows at all.
Absolutely nothing of that kind. And every, every
year store had these three exactly alike. And
finally, a man by the name of copy who had the
hardware store put up a very lovely, fancy
decorated building. And one by one, various ones
would add a little bit more to make his building
just very attractive in every way. We had no cement
sidewalks. No, the street, the sidewalks
downtown was out of wooden plank.
And the women in those days wore long dresses. down
to their ankles. You never saw a woman go in a shoe
store and try on a pair of shoes. She wouldn't dare
to sit down in the chair and let a man try her shoes on
her. There's two things that she always took home
to try on, and that was her shoes and her corset. She
never allowed anybody to help. In fact, there was
no place to have it. We had no dressing rooms for any
of the stores at all in those days. My father had a
little show window that he got when he
went to market one day, one year, and he took two men
to lift it, and he'd put women's hats in there maybe
and show one week and next week he'd have his shoes
and the next week he'd have something else in this
one little show window but it had to be packed out by
two of the clerks and put in the wall of one of the
doors you know where the three doors all come
together We had no electric lights, all swinging
lamps and wall lamps. And of course, that was a
thing that the clerks traded more than anything
else to keep these lamps and the chimneys washed
and keep them filled with kerosene oil to be ready
for business the next day. And
we only had one school building. And that was a very
large building and a very pretty building, I
thought. And they added, finally added, when I was
about eight years old, they added two sides that
each side took care of two grades, one downstairs
and one upstairs. And
there was only 10 grades. And we thought we had
mighty fine school teachers. And the man in charge
was Major Banks. And he was a very fine, educated
man. And so we thought it was very fine. And then,
too, the churches were very good in the community.
The Methodist Church is where it is now. and the
ground was given to us by the H and T C railroad. And
then they took up a collection and built a wooden
church there, which was always a joy to our family
because we loved the church work. My mother was a
charter member of the church. My father was not a,
Methodists at that time. His family were Baptist
people. But he went on to the Methodist church and
worked in the church Sunday school and the church
proper as it came about. They had things quite
different then from what they do now. The young
people had what we called an Epworth League that we
did our Christian work together. in and it was very
wonderful and and it brought us very close
together too because everybody knew everybody
else then in those days and they had a picket fence
around the church where the people that couldn't
walk and didn't have any way to get there they they
just walked to church and uh our um Horses and
buggies didn't do very much good for that purpose,
but there were some of the members who lived
between here and college, and they had to come in
their carriage, and their surrey, what they
called a fringed top surrey, and they had a nice
congregation, and everybody was very happy over
there. the situation of the church and we always
had good pastors and were able to pay them a salary
and they had, uh, uh, branch store, uh, uh,
churches that they had to go to one, the preacher
did, and he was paid mostly by farm products of
chickens and, and fruits and vegetables and
things of that kind. And it was all very, very fine.
And then we had the courthouse was brought here
from Madison, from the edge of town here. And we
took part in that. I was thinking the other day to
how I attended. the service and the Masonic Lodge
had charge of the laying of the cornerstone. And so
they built that lovely courthouse with the clock
in it and the clock struck and everybody was happy
and they could go by that because they could hear it
all over town and also see it all over town. And
everybody went to church on time, went to school on
time and everywhere they went they were on on time
and it's
I don't know just exactly what year that they begin
to spread out but of course I'm very glad to say that
I have lived in the town long enough to see it
progress from one thing to the other for for the
best of everybody concerned and now it's a very
lovely little city and I'm glad I've had a part in it
and my father and mother were very fine citizens
and every house had a fence around it because the
stock ran out and everybody's chickens ran out And
so if you didn't want it to happen to you, you just
kept your gate closed, and that kept them out. But
it was a long time before we ever did get the fences
down. And it's so much nicer, of course, than to
have the stock because it It was just always
hollering, oh, I wish so-and-so would come get
that cow out of my yard. And they did do a lot of
damage to the flowers in the yard, and we had very
little grass. I can't remember ever having a
lawnmower because everybody had just a regular
dirt yard, and they had gardens where there was big
enough But on each block, there was always six or
eight houses. Sometimes it'd be four little
houses on one half and four on the other or three on
the other. And that is a reason that we had this
large place to hear, to live on, that we could
enjoy. being by ourselves and have our things so
that they wouldn't bother other people and i i just
don't know uh how much longer it's going to take to
make us a real big city but With A&M College booming
like it is, and with the school spreading out,
there was only one school when I was a child. And
when I came up and when I graduated, there was only
one school. And I went to Kidd Key College to finish
my education, which was later terminated into the
SMU. So all of the
Kid Key College students that were coming on that
year got their diplomas from SMU after it started
in Dallas.
And what else do you want to know? Miss Dona, where
did you meet your husband? Oh, my husband. Oh,
sure. I met him right here, honey. He came over, and
with two other men, they organized the Eagle. And
it was up over what we call now Worldwide Store. But
it was in a store, a grocery store, I believe it was,
upstairs. And so they stayed up there, and the
other two moved. One of them went to Huntsville
because he thought Huntsville would make a bigger
city than Brown did. So he went over there and
worked in the same paper that's still in existence
over there, too. And my husband's other partner
then, he had to move on account of his little boy had
developed consumption, and they had to move. for
his health, and that left all the double
responsibility of running the paper and paying
for it to my husband. And then when I came back from
Kedki College as a graduate and a young girl, he
had met me just before I left to go to school where
the LaSalle Hotel is now. upstairs was a lovely
place to have opera and hometown plays and
graduation plays and whatever you want to use it
for. And it was a very lovely place to go to, too. And
so some of the boys gave three of the girls that were
going off to college a big party. And so that was his
chance. And he got one of the boys who knew me real
well to make out my program and to put four dancers
down for him. And I thought I was very popular with
the young man that took me, and I thought he was in
love with me, or he wouldn't have taken so many
dances with me. But I found out afterwards that Mr.
Collins had asked him to reserve some dances for
him. So he came up and was introduced to me. And then
ever after that, we were sweethearts.
So then he progressed along, and that was when the
paper was just a weekly. It was only printed once a
week. And then after that, he
got out a daily. It was a morning paper. And he just,
after we married, he had a beautiful bridal home
for me spread this office building is over there
now and that office building is mine now they put up
there which is very useful for the people lawyers
who work close to the courthouse but anyhow i we
stayed at home very little because he was afraid to
leave me alone at night while he was working at the
paper and I stayed over here with my Papa and Mama.
And as I did for every other thing that I wanted,
because I was raised the baby of the family. And
I've always been waited on. But that's where he met
me, was in this beautiful opera
house. I'd call it play house.
We especially had something to look forward to
because every year there was an Indian show that
came here and put on a show and that gave us children
an idea to play with all during the year because
we'd clean out the buggy house And we'd all gather
around and have an ending show. And sometimes it
would get so good that we thought the neighbors
ought to come and they'd have to pay to come in. So we
charged for them to come to the show. And we made our
money that way, putting on ending shows, copying
after the ones who came from Town to town, I suppose
they did, because we only had the one railroad at
that time, and of course we didn't have the
automobile. And I have always said that I was never
going to say I will not ride that, and I will not do
that, because whenever I have ever done it, I have
told a story, because I turned out to be one of the
very first to do it. And that is riding in an
airplane. I remember it so distinctly.
I remember two boys that had a little plane. And
they charged.
After I was left a widow, I began to travel over the
years. And I wrote the social column for the Eagle
to help my husband. And I kept that for 30 years,
writing that social column every week. It came out
on Thursday. And I wrote all my parties and
weddings and what I thought would be of any
interest in the social way. to be put into this
paper on Thursday. So the paper then grew in
interest and grew in interest. And I got tired, and
I stopped writing the paper. But the paper
progressed. very nicely without my help. I think
it will continue to do so anyhow. But everybody who
owned any part in the paper sold recently, a few
years back, to this company that owns it now.
How many brothers and sisters did you have? I had
two brothers and one sister. Are they still living
here? No, all of the family is dead but me. My doctor
brother became, my two brothers went to A&M
College and my sister graduated at Kidd Key
College the same year that they graduated out
there at 1895. 1805, I mean. And, no, it was 1895.
1895. So
I was always the baby and the others always had to
wait on me and and do my school work for me and
everything like that, you know. But my sister's
son is living here and my doctor My oldest brother
finished at A&M with honors, and he won the first
Ross Volunteer Medal that was ever presented at
A&M College. He was a cadet colonel out there, and
he helped organize football. He's famous. It was
organized in 1993, 1893.
That's the year that he went to A&M. He and my
brother Walter Colter went out there and stayed
and had rooms. And they didn't come home very
often.
But the boys would come in so often, and I taught
them how to dance. They didn't know how to dance,
and they'd come in on the 12 o'clock train, and my
mother would feed them. And then I'd dance with
them until 3 o'clock in the afternoon and drive
them down to the station. And they'd get the train
back to college. And they only had two dances every
year. That was the Ross Volunteer and the
commencement. But they got out beautiful
invitations. And there were only 16 boys to
graduate at that time.
They both were very, very popular students at A&M.
They were very likable businessmen when they got
through. Ms. Stone, I understand there were
pretty bad floods and droughts here many years
back. Do you remember? Well, at one time there was
so many people died during the time because a
terrible Just a terrific
cold spell wind came up with the hard rain at the
same time that they were trying to save lives and
save cattle down there. While this terrible spell
came, there were three or four that died from Brian
that went down there. Only I think there were five
boys, as well as I remember, went down there
together. to try to help save cattle people. And
this terrible wind, and it was cold, bitter cold.
And they climbed into a tree to protect
themselves. And the wind was so strong, they took
off their belts and tied themselves to the limbs of
the tree. And they were all killed, all froze to
death. except one to tell the tale. And that was
just one instance out of many, many, many.
Do you remember when that was? No, I've forgotten
what year it was. But if I'd had time, I possibly
would have been able to remember that. But it was a
long time ago.
And that was before the automobiles came in. If I
remember correctly, they had no automobiles.
These boys went down on the train in some way. The
INGN train had just been put in, and I think they
went out on that. And it went right through the
richest part of it. valley down there and it was an
awfully sad thing but of course each family lost
somebody some some farm worker or somebody who
lived near them